Fatou: When you first start using it,
it feels uncomfortable.
I know that people will lose their s**t
when they see you using your cane
and you can still see them
and they're just staring at you.
I know it throws them off,
but I'm like, “Look, you better
look out because you're going
to run your head into something
and crack your head open”.
That's why I use my cane.
[laughter]
[music plays]
Greg: So the first time that I saw a cane,
I saw a person using it
and just kind of walking by me
and I was like, “I wonder what that is”.
I noticed that they had
something in their hands,
but I wasn't sure exactly what it was.
And my family had to actually give me
the explanation that
the person couldn't see,
and it was something
that they used to help them.
What does it mean if somebody
is using a cane like this?
So Gene, my instructor
at the time actually said,
“Well, it's for safety when somebody travels.
So you want to make sure
that you're protecting yourself
and not bumping into obstacles.”
I wonder if that's something
that I should use.
But at the same time,
I wasn't sure if I was ready to use it
because I felt embarrassed having to use
something that looked like that.
Rebecca: When you have a disability that,
to a large extent you can
either hide or that you can't see
just from looking at someone,
someone I don't think would look at me
and say, oh, she's DeafBlind.
Or, she’s going deaf and blind.
And so having to make that decision
of putting myself out in the world
openly as a person with a disability,
that's a coming out process.
I remember hating using my cane.
I used to sometimes use umbrellas
and sort of navigate my way,
because I just wasn't ready
to put myself out there.
And the first, you know,
I don't know, five, six, seven,
eight times I used my cane in public
I cried because there
was a mourning process.
There is that grieving process
of no longer being seen
as a fully sighted person,
as someone without a disability.
Fatou: You do not have to ever
feel embarrassed because of your cane.
People will never understand
why a DeafBlind person needs to use their cane
when they have some vision.
The first time I started using my cane,
it was awkward.
It felt weird having people staring at me.
And I mean, I don't know, I find it funny.
And then eventually
I built more confidence
and I didn't pay no mind to the people
that were watching me
because it's about you and your safety.
[music plays]
James: So this is my mobility cane.
I have a carabiner that I can attach
to my belt loop so that
my hands are free to sign.
And when I try and figure out my cane
amongst others of my friends,
I have these beads on here
that identify this as mine.
Noticing that I also have this big roller.
Lydia: The white cane can serve
a lot of purposes.
Of course, the primary one is ensuring
that I don't bump into obstacles
in front of me, but after
having a lot of experience with it,
if you're a seasoned user,
you can get a lot of
other information from it,
such as the type of terrain
you're walking on.
You can
feel where you are in space
and give you clues about
where you need to go.
Rebecca: My worst vision is below me.
So using that cane can be very helpful
so that I don't have to be looking
down and up and down and up.
It gives me that information.
But when it's dark out, and particularly
when it's dark out in an area
that I'm not familiar with,
where I don't know
there's a crack in the street here
or a pothole here or whatever,
I find myself relying so much more heavily
on the very tip of my cane.
And in those moments of being able
to use my cane and rely
on the tip of my cane on that touch
and recognizing that it was connecting
directly to a part of my brain
that I was developing a muscle
that I was learning to exercise.
I started to feel so much more trust
in using my cane and confidence,
and that was something
that was so cool that I felt
this need to share it with the world.
Like, how cool is this?
You know, that we have all of these parts
of our brain, of our bodies
that we just don't use,
likely because we have other senses
or abilities to make up for it.
But that when you do lose
these senses or abilities,
that your body has an incredible
way of compensating.
[music plays]
Greg: Initially, it was terrible.
I mean, at night
I would bump into everything and everybody
and people would get mad at me.
And I'm like, you know,
I just couldn't see them.
But now having the cane,
I was able to identify things
or people that were in my way
and they could see the cane
which made them get out of my way.
It's like parting the Red Sea.
Everybody gets out of my way as I'm
walking down the street with my cane.
James: I'm not only deaf,
but I'm also DeafBlind.
So it's difficult on the train
because sometimes there’s steps.
So it takes me a bit to get up those steps
and people are always rushing to get on
and sometimes people get pissed,
you know, like, “come on!”
And I'm like, “I didn't see you.”
You know, people don't know
where I can and cannot see.
So that's sometimes problematic.
And if I have my cane, you know,
that helps me because people
kind of, they part the way
so that I can get through.
They see that they have to go around me.
Greg: Practicing at home,
over time, I would be able
to go to the store at night.
You know my girlfriend was like,
“Oh, I need to go to the store.”
I'm like, “oh, I can do it.”
And sure enough, with my cane,
I was able to go out and do it on my own,
again because people
sort of got out of my way.
So it's so much better
now than when it was, you know,
me knocking into people, knocking them down,
me knocking myself down.
And I didn't have to be embarrassed.
And it's great.
James: My cane helps me
a tremendous amount.
I feel like I’m equal now.
[music ends]